"the batman phenomena gives me great satisfaction to realize that i have millions of fans in the world. that i have created a hero that influenced so many people in the world and it gives me a wonderful spiritual satisfaction to know that and it really touches my heart, i feel so gratified that i created a superhero who can reach all elements of our society, and that's quite fulfilling"
-bob kane

batman is a superhero co-created by artist bob kane and writer bill finger and published by dc comics. the character made his first appearance in detective comics #27 (may, 1939). batman is the secret identity of bruce wayne. witnessing the murder of his parents as a child leads him to train himself to physical and intellectual perfection and don a bat-themed costume in order to fight crime. batman operates in gotham city, assisted by various supporting characters including his sidekick robin and his butler alfred pennyworth, and fights an assortment of villains influenced by the characters' roots in film and pulp magazines. unlike most superheroes, he does not possess any superpowers; he makes use of intellect, detective skills, science and technology, wealth, physical prowess, and intimidation in his war on crime.

batman became a popular character soon after his introduction, and eventually gained his own title, batman. as the decades wore on, differing takes on the character emerged. the late 1960s batman television series utilized a camp aesthetic associated with the character for years after the show ended. various creators worked to return the character to his dark roots, culminating in the 1986 miniseries batman: the dark knight returns, by writer-artist frank miller. that and the success of director tim burton's 1989 batman motion picture helped reignite popular interest in the character. a cultural icon, batman has been licensed and adapted into a variety of media, from radio to television and film, and appears on a variety of merchandise sold all over the world. the batman goes by numerous nicknames, such as the dark knight, the caped crusader, or simply the bat.

batman's history has undergone various revisions, both minor and major. few elements of the character's history have remained constant. scholars william uricchio and roberta e. pearson noted in the early 1990s, "unlike some fictional characters, the batman has no primary urtext set in a specific period, but has rather existed in a plethora of equally valid texts constantly appearing over more than five decades."

the central fixed event in the batman stories is the character's origin story. as a little boy, bruce wayne is shocked to see his parents, the physician dr. thomas wayne and his wife martha wayne, being murdered by a mugger in front of his very eyes. this drives him to fight crime in gotham city as the batman.

pearson and uricchio also noted beyond the origin story and such events as the introduction of robin, "until recently, the fixed and occurring and hence, canonized, events have been few in number," a situation altered by an increased effort by later batman editors such as dennis o'neil to ensure consistency and continuity between stories.

batman was involved in a battle with dr. simon hurt and the "black glove," a criminal organization dedicated to corrupting virtue, as they attempted to destroy batman and everything for which he stands.
using a mixture of physical and psychological attacks, the black glove tests batman's resolve, forcing him to temporarily adopt the crazed persona of the "batman of zur-en-arrh." he is then led to arkham asylum to face the joker. seemingly defeated, batman is buried alive by the black glove, a group that includes bruce wayne's girlfriend, jezebel jet, who has betrayed him. with the assistance of robin and nightwing he turns the tables on his foes. in a final confrontation with dr. hurt, batman is caught in a helicopter crash.

the storyline concludes with both batman's fate and the true identity of dr. hurt still in the air. hurt himself repeatedly claimed to be thomas wayne throughout the story, while batman apparently believed him to be mangrove pierce, a crazed actor.
