the common house martin is a migratory passerine bird of the swallow family which breeds in europe, north africa and temperate asia, and winters in sub-saharan africa and tropical asia. it feeds on insects which are caught in flight. it has a blue head and upperparts, white rump and pure white underparts, and is found in both open country and near human habitation. it is a noisy species, especially at its breeding colonies. it is similar in appearance to the two other martin species of the delichon genus, which are endemic to eastern and southern asia. its scientific name (delichon urbicum) and common name both relate to its use of man-made structures. it builds a closed cup nest from mud pellets under eaves or similar locations on buildings usually in colonies, but sometimes fouling below nests can be a problem. it is hunted by the eurasian hobby, and like other birds is affected by internal parasites and external fleas and mites, although its large range and population mean that it is not threatened globally. it's proximity to man has led to some cultural and literary references, including a description in macbeth.

the common house martin was originally a cliff and cave nester, and some cliff-nesting colonies still exist, with the nests built below an overhanging rock. it now largely uses human structures such as bridges and houses. unlike the barn swallow, it uses the outside of inhabited buildings, rather than the inside of barns or stables. the nests are built at the junction of a vertical surface and an overhang, such as on house eaves, so that they may be strengthened by attachment to both planes.

breeding birds return to europe between april and may, and nest building starts between late march in north africa and mid-june in lapland. the nest is a neat closed convex cup fixed below a suitable ledge, with a narrow opening at the top. it is constructed by both sexes with mud pellets collected in their beaks, and lined with grasses, hair or other soft materials. the mud, added in successive layers, is collected from ponds, streams or puddles. house sparrows frequently attempt to take over the nest during construction, with the house martins rebuilding elsewhere if they are successful. the entrance at the top of the cup is so small once it is complete that sparrows cannot take over the nest.

the common house martin has been regularly recorded as hybridising with the barn swallow, this being one of the most common passerine interspecific crosses. the frequency of this hybrid has led to suggestions that delichon is not sufficiently separated genetically from hirundo to be considered a separate genus.
